== Part 2: A crash course in web coding ==

This part provides a very quick "hands dirty" session on HTML, CSS and JavaScript. We're not giving all the information - we are just trying to get the reader comfortable and give him/her a sense of achievement to begin with, before they get bored by all the details ;-) 

* Explain what HTML, CSS, and JavaScript in more detail
** Provide examples that people can modify and that link the three together
* Show what a simple site structure might look like
** Provide examples that can be copied as starting points
* Go through simple HTML anatomy
** Provide a skeleton that shows what an HTML page looks like, explain its purpose.
** Use colors to indicate what a complete page structure looks like
* Dissect the page created above to show other details
** headings and paragraphs
** bullet points
** an image maybe
** Accessibility attributes for images are important to include from the get-go
* Basic HTML gotchas
** mistakes in using reserved characters
*** get into the habit of using &amp; instead of plain &
** quote problems
*** start with " and end with '
** incorrect paths
** bad nesting
*** this is bad <p><b>bold paragraph</p></b>
** missing attributes
* Simple CSS anatomy
** selectors
*** simple
*** complex
** How they are applied to HTML (and other markup?)
* How to apply CSS to HTML - 3 ways
  * Directly to the element
  * In a style element for the entire document
  * in an external stylesheet
* CSS gotchas
** bad pathing
** missing semi colons
** missing attributes
** incorrect adding of classes to elements 
*** I've seen people try to use `<class="heading">content</class>`
** Using CSS instead of HTML to build structure


== Getting Started ==

All web pages use HTML. Most pages will use CSS to make things look pretty and Javascript (also known as Ecmascript) to interact with the user. 

In this part we'll concentrate in HTML and CSS. Javascript will be covered in its own section because of the amount of content we need to cover to make it justice.  We'll start by defining our terms

=== HTML ===

'''Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)''' has been around since the beginnings of the web. It is based in older markup languages (SGML) which is used mostly in publishing.

It is called markup because it "marks up" the text with tags to indicate structure and basic styling. This is an example of an HTML "tag"

<syntaxhighlight lang="html5">
  <p id="example">This is a paragraph.</p>
</syntaxhighlight>

=== CSS ===

'''Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)''' is a rules based style language which primary use is to "style" or give visual presentation to the HTML content. Styling the HTML above looks like this:

<syntaxhighlight lang="css">
#example {
  color: #ff0000;
  font-weight: bold;
}
</syntaxhighlight>

<code>#example</code> is how CSS represents the <code>id="example"</code> HTML attribute. This means that for the element with an ID of example, CSS will make its color red and it will make it bold.

=== Javascript ===

Javascript is a programming language first created by Brendan Eich (then at Netscape) and currently standardized by [[http://www.ecma-international.org/ ECMA International]]. We can use Javscript to add interactivity to websites and to build web applications that interact with databases and other external resources.

An example of a Javascript function is shown below. It takes a number and returns the value of the number multiplied by itself

<syntaxhighlight lang="javascript">
function square(number) {
  return number * number;
}
</syntaxhighlight>

With the quick overview of the technologies out of the way, let's get some get our hands dirty with some HTML :-)

== What HTML looks like ==

This is what a barebones HTML document (page) looks like:

<syntaxhighlight lang="html5">
<!doctype html>
  <html lang="en-US">
    <head>
      <meta charset="utf-8">
      <title></title>
      <meta name="description" content="">
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/normalize.css">
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/main.css">
      <script src="js/script.js"></script>
    </head>
    <body>
      <!-- Add your site or application content here -->
      <p>Hello world! This is HTML5 Boilerplate.</p>
    </body>
  </html>
</syntaxhighlight>

It is divided in two areas