* Course Introduction
**Who is this course for?
**What will it and won't it teach?
* What is the web?
** Links to external resources along with our brief explanation
* What are web standards?
** Standard Organizations
*** WHATWG / W3C
*** IETF for websockets
*** ECMA/ISO for JavaScript/EcmaScript
* What is accessibility and why it's important?
* The Web Components: JavaScript, HTML and CSS
** HTML is the language used to write the content and structure of web content
** CSS is used to style the content and separate the presentation from the content itself
** JavaScript provides one way to add scripted content and interactivity
* Tools and their uses:
** Web Browser
** Code editor
** FTP program
** Web hosting
* How does the web work, in simple terms, and how do your tools slot into that?


== Part 1: The beginning ==

This set of tutorials is designed to familiarize people with concepts and tools for creating web content using HTML, CSS and Javascript.

It is not meant as a complete  Javascript or CSS course nor to teach your favorite framework. There are several courses and tutorials available online both for  free and paid that will do an excellent job of teaching you advanced Javascript.  If  you are you looking for training in a framework, you can find information and documentation for it in the framework's web site 

=== What is the web? ===

The web started as an information exchange system for the high energy physics community. It has grown into a world wide communication system for text and multimedia content.


http://www.w3.org/History.html


=== Web Standards ===

Browser makers and web developers have to agree  as to what the web will look like. We do t his with web standards.  

(from [http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Web_standards Wikipedia])

Web standards are the formal, non-proprietary standards and other technical specifications that define and describe aspects of the World Wide Web. In recent years, the term has been more frequently associated with the trend of endorsing a set of standardized best practices for building web sites, and a philosophy of web design and development that includes those methods.

Web standards include many interdependent standards and specifications, some of which govern aspects of the Internet, not just the World Wide Web. Even when not web-focused, such standards directly or indirectly affect the development and administration of web sites and web services. Considerations include the interoperability, accessibility and usability of web pages and web sites.

Web standards, in the broader sense, consist of the following:

* Recommendations published by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
* The Living Standards published by the Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group (WHATWG)
* Ecmascript (Javascript) standards published by Ecma International (formerly ECMA)

While not web stadards directly, standards from the organizations below affect the web and its component technologies.

* Internet standard (STD) documents published by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
* Request for Comments (RFC) documents published by the Internet Engineering Task Force
* Standards published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
* The Unicode Standard and various Unicode Technical Reports (UTRs) published by the Unicode Consortium
* Name and number registries maintained by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)

Web standards are not fixed sets of rules, but are a constantly evolving set of finalized technical specifications of web technologies. 

Web standards are developed by standards organizations, groups of interested and often competing parties chartered with the task of standardization, not technologies developed and declared to be a standard by a single individual or company.

It is crucial to distinguish those specifications that are under development from the ones that already reached the final development status (in case of W3C specifications, the highest maturity level).

=== Accessibility ===

http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Web_accessibility