Takes place at the same time as the Battlestar Galactica pilot, SAGA OF
A STAR WORLD. I therefore assume that you know that this has nothing to
do with my BATTLESTAR GALACTICA: THE NEXT GENERATION series, but an
appearance is possible in one of those stories. Fire your flames to
jchin01@kepler.poly.edu and I'll send a few megavolts of lasers your
way.

                       BATTLESTAR ANDROMEDA

There are those who believe that life here began out there, far across the universe, with tribes of humans who may have been the forefathers of the Egyptians, or the Toltecs, or the Mayans. That they may have been the architects of the great pyramids, or the lost civilizations of Lemuria or Atlantis. Some believe that there may yet be brothers and sisters of man who even now fight to survive, somewhere beyond the heavens.

                       BATTLESTAR ANDROMEDA
                           Written by
                            Joe Chin
                  Based on Battlestar Galactica
                           Created by
                         Glen A. Larson

The Battlestar Andromeda was the latest battlestar built, top of the
line and state of the art of all battlestars. She would soon find out
that it would be the last one built by the Colonies. That includes the
Galactica, commanded by Commander Andrea's older brother, Adama. Even
with all the overhauls for upgrades and retrofits performed on the
Galactica, the Andromeda would still out-class the Galactica.
  Commander Andrea strolled around the bridge, looking at, well,
everything. The most amazing of it all, out of all of the qualified
Colonial warriors awaiting to become a commander of a battlestar, the
Council of Twelve chose Andrea, a woman.
  The speculation going around was: Andrea was chosen because she was
the most prominent battlestar commander's little sister... Adama is a
close friend of President Adar, so that was why she was given the
assignment...
  Those who served with the hot-shot viper pilot yahrens ago, and were
still around to tell about it, knew better.
  Andrea sat at the table in her quarters staring at her own service
record. It had just been dumped into the library computers from Gemoni
Deep Space Station 98.
  Yahrens ago, she served as a viper pilot aboard the Rycon under
Commander Kronus, right after she graduated from the academy. The
dialogue between the young ensign and Commander Kronus in his private
quarters before that fateful time of the Battle of the Cosmara
Archipelago rang in her mind.
  <Personally, Ensign Andrea, I don't believe in this predicting the
future felgercarb. I may be strict in my command, but I AM open to any
suggestions.>  That was Commander Kronus voice. <So, assuming that you
ARE correct about this, how does the Fourth Fleet survive this ambush?>
  <There is no way to survive this, but I am not the commander; you
are. I can only... RECOMMEND... that we keep everyone of full alert
status. Let the other commanders and warriors do the rest. That will at
LEAST maximize the number of survivors, including yourself.>

{Commander Kronus took her advice, and even though all of the mother
ships were destroyed, many vipers and shuttles carried survivors,
including Commander Kronus, himself, severely wounded in a viper, and
Ensign Andrea providing him coverage single-handedly. But as the
Commanding officer, he ordered the bridge crew to abandon the Rycon, as
he performed one last thing before following his own orders to abandon
the dying battlestar. At the helm, with blood dripping from a gash in
his forehead, he punched in a set of coordinates with his good arm, and
then turned on the main thrusters to send the battlestar forwards. Then
he ran off the bridge.
  Kronus himself fired at Cylon fighters in a viper, with help from
Ensign Andrea and her wingmate, Ensign Saleya. Together, they watched
the dying Battlestar Rycon, ram into a Cylon basestar. Luckily, the
explosion from the collision sent the entire rear end of the battlestar
into another basestar.
  Meanwhile, the Cerberus came to the rescue, launching its vipers.
Three vipers rendezvoused with the them, and she heard, *Captain Adama
of Bronze Squadron reporting to help... Permission to join the fight.*
  *Commander Kronus here... Permission granted, Captain.*
  *You've Got three on your tails, Lieutenants Cain and Apollo...* That
was Captain Adama's voice.
  With his good arm, Kronus maneuvered his viper around, picking up the
two vipers and three Cylon fighters on his targeting scanners. Ensigns
Andrea and Saleya flew in formation with their commander. After the
vipers were cleared, they pressed the FIRE button on their control
sticks, destroying all three of them, but the Cylons destroyed one of
the vipers.
  *Thank you, whoever that was.*
  *My pleasure. Lieutenant Cain is it?*
  *Yes, Commander.*
  *Well, my apologies of not being able to save your wingmate, but
watch your tail next time, Lieutenant.*
  *Yes, Commander.*
  Commander Kronus led the attack of the combined squadrons of vipers
from the Fourth Fleet ships and from the Cerberus on the other basestar
that led to its destruction. The fourth basestar got away.}

{This was where Adama met Kronus, and he, Cain, and Andrea received a
lesson from him about duty.
  She and Saleya stayed beside his bed in the life center all
throughout his recovery. While mourning the loss of their good friend
Apollo, Adama and Cain stayed beside her and Saleya to keep her
company.
  She and Saleya had served under Captain Cain on the Cerberus, Andrea
as a sergeant on Bronze Squadron, a promotion highly recommended by
Commander Kronus, and Saleya, an Ensign. Commander Beanpod, proud
father of a little boy named Greenbean who was left home in care of his
mother, was in command of the Cerberus. Little did she know at the time
that the little boy would grow up to attend the academy, with his first
assignment being the Galactica, her brother's battlestar.
  Adama had transferred to the Galactica as Colonel, to serve with
their father, Commander Troy. Anyway, Adama needed to get off the
Cerberus, unable to bear the loss of his long-time friend, Apollo. He
would later on get sealed, and name his first-born in his honor.
  Commander Kronus retired.}

That was the first thing on her service record.
  BATTLESTAR RYCON, ENSIGN, ORANGE SQUADRON.
  SERVED WITH DISTINCTION. AWARDED THE GOLD CLUSTER FOR SAVING MANY
LIVES.RECOMMENDATION FOR PROMOTION TO SERGEANT. - COMMANDER KRONUS.

The next lines of her service record read:
  BATTLESTAR CERBERUS, SERGEANT, BRONZE SQUADRON.
  BATTLESTAR CERBERUS, LIEUTENANT, BRONZE SQUADRON.

The destruction of the battlestar Cerberus was in the battle of Umbra.
A basestar attacked Caprica, and the Cerberus, which was already
damaged from previous skirmishes, responded to the distress call.
Several precise missiles from the Cylon basestar, and recall of the
fighters attacking Umbra led to the demise of the Cerberus.

{After a bright flash, Sergeant Saleya asked, *What in Hades was that?*
  *That was the Cerberus,* answered Captain Cain.
  *NOOOooo...!* cried Saleya.
  *MY GOD!* cried Andrea.
  *Hold yourself together, Lieutenant... Sergeant...* ordered Cain.
*Don't-*
  Cain's viper fired two rounds, destroying a Cylon fighter.
  *I understand, Captain,* responded Andrea.
  From nowhere, more vipers, led by a larger vessel that looked like a
smaller version of a battlestar, but without launch/landing bays, came
in to help. Actually, compared to a battlestar, it was smaller than one
of its landing/launch bays, but not quite small enough to fit into one.
  *Captain Tigh of the Triton Two. Land aboard the Pacifica and refuel,
Bronze Squadron. Let US take care of the rest.*
  Andrea recognized the name, Tigh, as someone who served aboard the
Bellerephon. He had attended the academy around the same time as Cain
and Adama, and knew each other. Tigh had also served as Adama's
wingmate in the past as well, and had remained good friends after
that.}

A love triangle formed between Andrea and Saleya, and Cain. They both
had affairs with him, at different times. They both loved him, and he
loved them both. Finally, the choice was Saleya. Andrea was not about
to give up her career for any man. Saleya resigned her commission, and
got sealed to him.
  She ended up finding herself pregnant, and took a furlon to have a
baby boy, Zane. However, according to the data, Zane does not have a
father.
  Shortly thereafter, Captain Cain transferred to the Pegasus as a
colonel, and she made captain, but not of Bronze Squadron. The
surviving Cerberus viper squadrons were all reassigned, and Bronze
Squadron was dissolved.

The next line of her service record read,
  WARSHIP TRITON, CAPTAIN, COMMANDING OFFICER

She ended up commanding the Triton II for a short while as Captain, and
Cain became a colonel aboard the Pegasus. She replaced Tigh, who became
Colonel aboard the Galactica when Adama got promoted.
  From there, she taught at the academy on Caprica for a while, and
then was transferred to a Caprican space station as Colonel.

The next lines of her record read,
  ACADEMY of CAPRICA, CAPTAIN, LAB ASSISTANT
  ACADEMY of CAPRICA, COLONEL, INSTRUCTOR
  DEEP SPACE STATION 19, CAPRICA, COLONEL, ADMINISTRATOR

As a colonel, the space station was attacked by Cylon forces, to be
driven away or blown to space dust by Big Brother, who happened to have
stopped there for fuel, supplies, and repairs. The technicians had just
completed the repair jobs, and the Galactica had just received a
maximum fuel load when a Cylon basestar arrived.

{The Galactica positioned itself in between the space station and the
basestar, and Red and Blue Squadron vipers headed for the basestar to
intercept the Cylon fighters. Purple Squadron from the space station
also launched, led by Andrea.
  *Purple Squadron,* said Andrea into her helmetcom. *Let's give Blue
Squadron and Red Squadron a hand.*
  Adama ordered from the Galactica, *Andrea, get yourself back on that
space station before you get blown to space dust.*
  *Hey, Big Brother... This is MY space station we are trying to
protect here. Thank you for the assist, but this IS my fight.*
  This was a clear case of sibling rivalry. Whether or not she and/or
her brother knew it, she wanted to take the credit from her older
brother. Also, Adama was a commander, and Andrea was only a colonel.
She would be in for a surprise.
  A Blue Squadron viper appeared beside hers, firing at three Cylon
fighters she was trying to pursue, blowing all three to space dust.
Then a Cylon fighter was in pursuit of her. That Blue Squadron viper
rapidly fell behind, and the fighter in pursuit was also destroyed.
  *Thank you, whoever that was...* she said into her helmetcom.
  She was in for a surprise at the voice that answered her. *My
pleasure, Little Sister...*
  *ADAMA! Get back onto your battlestar... I need YOU to take the
Galactica in to destroy that basestar.*
  *Colonel Andrea... I am in command here. Besides... Colonel Tigh will
take care of that. Ready to do some damage to the basestar's landing
bays and weaponry?*
  *Yeah, LET'S DO IT!*
  *Lieutenant Apollo... Sergeant Starbuck... With me!* ordered Adama's
voice.
  *Sergeant Zane... Ensign Io... with me,* ordered Andrea's voice.
  The six vipers headed for the basestar.
  Three vipers headed for the upper hull of the basestar, and the other
three, the lower half, taking out the landing bays and laser turrets.
The six joined forces in between the two hulls, just blowing missile
launchers and more laser turrets.
  Then the six vipers headed away from the basestar.
  Adama ordered, *Colonel Tigh, move the Galactica into position...
flank speed. Ready missiles. Andrea, you give the final order.*
  The six vipers opened fire on a horde of Cylon fighters attempting a
pinwheel maneuver on another viper.
  *Thank you...*
  *Our pleasure, Boomer,* responded Adama.
  *Commander??*
  *Carry on, Ensign.*
  *Yes, Sir.*
  By this time, the Galactica was in position. *FIRE!* ordered Andrea
into herhelmetcom.
  The battlestar fired its lasers at the basestar.
  *Ready missile,* ordered Andrea.
  *Missile ready,* said a female voice.
  *Athena??*
  *Yes, Aunt Andrea... It's-*
  *FIRE!*
  The battlestar fired a missile. By this time, the basestar was
already in bad shape, thanks to Adama and Andrea, Apollo and Starbuck,
and Zane and Io.
  *Let's finish the job. Forward lasers... Commence firing.*
  *Yes, Colonel,* responded Tigh.
  A few more rounds of lasers fired continuously from the Galactica.
  *Ready another missile,* ordered Andrea.
  *Missile ready,* responded Tigh.
  *FIRE!*
  Another missile from the Galactica finished the job.
  *Status of the Galactica,* asked Adama.
  *Some minor damage to-* started Tigh's voice.
  *Bring the Galactica back to the station for repair,* ordered Andrea.
  *Do as she says,* said Adama.
  *Yes, Sir,* responded Tigh.
  They got back to the space station to find the commandant of the
space station buried under rubble. Andrea, Adama, Apollo, Starbuck, and
Zane struggled to move the beam off him, but after that was done, it
turned out that it was a wasted effort.
  "That would have been ME if I had stayed... But he ordered me to lead
Purple Squadron to-"
  "The Lords of Kobol works in mysterious ways, Andrea," said Adama.}

After several yahrens of haggling between the military headquarters on
Caprica and the Council of Twelve, she was promoted to Commander and
the construction of the Andromeda began. Little did she realize that
upon its completion yahrens later, she would be selected to be its
commander.

The next lines of her record read,DEEP SPACE STATION 19, CAPRICA,
COMMANDER, COMMANDANT / COMMANDING OFFICER

The Andromeda was almost complete, and was space worthy, but only as a
giant transport vessel. All it needed was the completion of missile
launchers, installation of laser turrets, installation of its landing
bays and a few squadrons of vipers. That was when the space station met
its fate.

{Another basestar arrived; its fighters launched. The vipers from the
ground and the station launched to intercept.
  Orders from Caprican military base was, *GET THAT BATTLESTAR AWAY
FROM THERE... LET US DO THE REST.*
  Orders were orders. She and what was left of the crew of the space
station got into the Andromeda, and went to light speed. The unfinished
battlestar stopped at Gemoni. That was where she met Captain Tolen. She
was then stationed at the newly-built space station 98, which was where
she was at the right place at the right time to be commandant of that
station.}

The next lines of her record read,DEEP SPACE STATION 98, GEMONI,
COMMANDER, COMMANDANT / COMMANDING OFFICER

During the yahrens of playing politics, she spent time with a dying
friend of hers named Saleya, the wife of Cain, who was dying of a rare
blood disease. She, the doctors and med-techs tried the ancient
practice of blood transfusions because synthesized blood and other
means of curing her proved ineffective. Her friend's daughter, Sheba,
gave small amounts of her blood every few sectons to try to prolong her
friend's life so she could await the return of her husband.
  At that time, Sheba was attending at The Academy, but had stay home
to care for her mother.
  After awhile, that proved ineffective. Then since Andrea and Saleya
had the same blood type, Andrea was also giving blood. That helped for
a short while. Other donors' blood did not work either, and Saleya
died. Even Zane had the same blood type, and tried to help as well.
Adama brought the Galactica over to see his little sister, and even
though he, Apollo and Athena had the same blood type, their blood did
not help either. She just deteriorated and then died. Then Adama was
off on another mission.
  From Deep Space Station 98, she told Cain the bad news.

{*This is not funny, Andrea... Don't do this to me, or I'll have you
stripped of rank...* Cain barked across the comm channel, waving his
tightened fist in front of his own face.
  *Cain, I am not playing around. I mean...* All that Andrea could do
was break down. *Saleya... was ... my best... friend... since we...
were... children.*
  Cain knew that she was serious. After wiping his own face, he said,
*My apologies, Andrea... I will be... in touch... Andrea... I'm taking
the Pegasus back to Gemoni.*
  With that, the channel closed.}

{Cain returned a few sectons later. When the Pegasus arrived, it was
almost out of fuel, and its engines needed a good repair job. It was
apparent that Commander Cain really worked them to try and get back to
the Colonies as soon as he could. The repair jobs were overseen by
Captain Tolen.
  Funeral arrangements were held, but as Cain had wanted it, it was
tended to by himself, Andrea, Zane and Sheba.
  He thanked Andrea for helping. He sent Sheba off to the Academy at
Caprica. His last trip aboard the Pegasus was taking Sheba to Caprica
and returning back to Gemoni. Then he kept himself isolated.
  He took an extended furlon, fighting it out with the Gemonian
officials and the Council of Twelve to let Andrea take command of the
Pegasus.
  Commander Cain circulated her service record around the room.
  "READ IT!" he yelled at the man at the head of the table, swinging
his swagger stick onto the table with a loud "THWACK!" and making
everyone jump.
  "Well, she's got great credentials..."
  She took Captain Tolen with her, and had him promoted to Colonel.
  During her posting on the Pegasus, nothing happened, except a few
skirmishes with Cylon basestars that ended up with the basestar either
running or exploding to space dust and debris, and rendering assistance
to a few Colonial ships here and there.
  The recall order of the Pegasus came about a yahren later, and Cain
was his old self again. Andrea could not figure it out, and did not
even ask about it. She was just glad to see the old Cain that she had
come to love and respect instead of that man who looked like him, but
was so down on himself. Tolen elected to stay aboard the Pegasus as the
executive officer. It was the last time she would actually see Cain, or
Tolen. The next heading of the Pegasus was to Caprica to pick up their
new Colonial warrior, Sheba.}

That was the next line on her service record.
  BATTLESTAR PEGASUS. COMMANDER / COMMANDING OFFICER PRO-TEM
  during Commander Cain's extended furlon.

Something else also distracted her from her reading. She looked behind
her on the shelving. Sitting there was a swagger stick, a souvenir from
her command of the Pegasus. Again, more memories surfaced.

{"I know you will take good care of the Pegasus," said Cain as he
handed her his swagger stick. "That's why I want YOU and no one else to
command the battlestar during my furlon."
  Andrea stared down at the pointer in her hand, knowing what his
giving it to her meant.
  Andrea stood in the landing bay of the Pegasus, with Cain's swagger
stick in one hand, and a small black box in the other.
  A viper's engines were shutting down, and landing bay crew were
pushing a canopy towards it.
  The pilot, Captain Tolen, removed his helmet as he climbed out of the
viper, and handed it to one of the crew that pushed the canopy over.
Then he walked down the steps of the canopy and headed towards Andrea.
  "Congratulations on getting command of a battlestar, Andrea," he said
to her.
  Andrea said nothing as she handed the small black box to Tolen.
  Tolen took the box, opened it, and then looked back at her,
pleasantly surprised. He was being promoted to Colonel!
  "Congratulations to you, too, Colonel," she said with a twinkle in
her eye. "I want no one else but you to be my exec."
  Noting the pointer in her hand, he said, "Looks like that Commander
Cain completely supports it."}

It was the same swagger stick that she was staring at behind her. After
that, it was back to being the administrator of Deep Space Station 98.
That was the last time she had seen Cain or Tolen. This place was also
where the partially constructed battlestar sat docked, awaiting
installation of weaponry and viper/shuttle bays, and reinstallation of
many of its innards because of deterioration, some from lack of use.

The construction of the Battlestar Andromeda was completed a few
yahrens later. It took a few yahrens because at first the
representatives of the Gemonian colony did not want to 'build somebody
else's battlestar.' It took a few yahrens of negotiating and bickering
between the Caprican and Gemonian officials to get it complete.
  Finally, with representatives from all twelve colonies, along with
her older brother, who had just gotten elected to the Council of
Twelve, she convinced the Caprican government and the Gemonian
government that no one colony should have claim over the battlestar.

{"... Another battlestar to fend off the gallmogging Cylons... One more
battlestar that might make a difference in this war that has lasted a
thousand yahrens."
  President Adar said, "The lady is right."
  "That's YOUR opinion, President," said the Gemonian Councillor.
  Adama spoke. "If we ship the resources, and send the cubits to pay
for the workers, will you agree?"
  "Yes, Commander Sire Adama."}

That was the last time she saw her brother.

She worked well and held up well under pressure. That, and becoming
battlestar commanders probably ran in the family. After all, her father
was commander of the Galactica before her brother was. She, too was now
in command of her own battlestar.

Andrea's JournalI make my very first log entry as commander. I, Andrea,
am the first woman to be a commander of a battlestar. The first woman
to ever make it past Captain on active duty. It is not because no one
trusts a woman as a commander, but not too many women actually enlist
to become warriors. Many of them perform civilian duties, such as
making the uniforms for the warriors, manufacture of parts and
weaponry, and other duties for the war effort. Women on battlestars are
usually the bridge officers, engineers, doctors and med-techs, and work
with the rations. The only women who has ever made it past captain in
Colonial history were those who became prominent teachers and
administrators at the Academies and other military bases throughout the
Colonies. I am a prime example of that, looking at my own Colonial
Military service record.
  Even my niece, Athena, has not flown a viper or, from what I know of,
commanded a battlestar.
  If not that, they usually fall in love with a fellow warrior, and
resign to get sealed and raise a family. Saleya, my former wingmate
during my time as a Bronze Squadron viper pilot is a good example of
that from my own experience.
  My nephew, Captain Apollo, and his best friend, Lieutenant Starbuck,
have made a name for Blue Squadron.
  Well to events happening. I, personally, don't believe that the
Cylons want peace with us humans. And, the way everyone has been
celebrating, so many gullible people, so many people who are sick of
the thousand-yahren war, well, I can only hope for the best for them. I
have my crew and warriors on alert, and attempts to contact the
Atlantia and Galactica at Cimtar have gone unanswered. We tried all
means of communication, standard conventional means, Alpha Comline One,
and even merchant codes. The responses I get are nothing but static,
which means that either there is some kind of interference between the
Andromeda and the fleet at Cimtar, or that the lines of communication
are being jammed. I happen to suspect the latter.
  Right now, it has been reported that a Cylon envoy is under way to
meet the President on the Atlantia in several centares. These
unanswered messages has me worried. I know that my brother would hold
up, but for how long?

The sound from the door signified that someone was waiting outside.
Andrea put the microphone down, and yelled, "Enter."
  A gray-haired man entered. "Commander Andrea, we will be arriving at
Caprica in a few centons."
  "Thank you, Colonel Meine," she responded. "I will launch in a
shuttle to pick up the someone special who will be with us as one of
our crew. Meanwhile, I'd like you to coordinate the arrival of our
warriors of Purple and Orange Squadrons. And they should be on alert
status."
  "Yes, Sir."
  "Tell me, Meine, what do YOU think of this peace with the Cylons?"
  "Well, Andrea, I have always wanted to see the day that this war that
has been ongoing for one-thousand yahrens would end, and I believe that
so do everyone else, to a point that they actually believe it."
  "Do you believe it to be true?"
  The Colonel had to think for a few microns there. "I have my doubts."
  "I don't believe it, Colonel. I am sure that it may be a plan by the
Cylons to get us to lay down our arms, and then get annihilated."
  "Well, Commander, if you don't believe that the Cylons really want
peace, then neither do I. Based on your history, every prediction that
you have ever made has been correct... one being the attack on Umbra
thirty yahrens ago."
  "Everyone thought that I was a young, crazy Ensign at the time. And
then about Umbra, everyone on the Cerberus thought that I was a crazy
sergeant."
  "Well, those Cylons would have done more than take out an
agricultural settlement had it not been for your... insights. They
reacted, but just a little too late. So, if you say that the Cylons are
planning an attack, I believe it."
  "I have been wrong, too, Colonel."
  "Not often, Commander. Not often. I mean, I may not know you
personally yet, but- from your past history, you DO have a unique gift,
and had the courage to use it to the best of your ability."
  "And there are those who think that I am crazy... All these medical
and psychological tests that these doctors and med-techs on the
Cerberus and the Triton Two at our bases and the various academies I
worked at put me through, poking around my head..."
  "Commander!" interrupted the Colonel.
  She approached him with daggers in her eyes pointing directly at him.
He tooka step back.
  "Commander..." He held up his hands, the body language saying that he
did not want a fight. "I just wanted to say, that based on reports of
all these doctors and med-techs, you ARE a gifted colonial warrior...
even more gifted than the most prominent commander presently in
existence... your own brother, Adama."
  "Don't try patronizing me, Colonel."
  "I am only stating fact. I have known Doctor Salik for many yahrens,
and I am going by what he told me. The last time I met him was when he
was transferred to the Galactica."
  They were interrupted by a man's voice, *Bridge to Commander
Andrea...*
  She went to the table, and pressed a button. "Go ahead."
  *E-T-A to Caprica is ten microns... your shuttle is ready to launch.*
  *Thank you, James.*
  She turned to the Colonel. "All right, Colonel... You're in command
during my absence."
  "Yes, Commander," he responded.
  They both stormed out of the room.

*Launch control has been handed to you, Commander. Launch when ready.*
echoed throughout the interior of the shuttle.
  "Thank you, Lieutenant," she responded.
  She switched the four switches, took hold of the control stick, and
pressed the TURBO button.

Six shuttles headed towards the planet.

On the planet surface, Andrea approached a house, to be greeted by
another woman.
  "Andrea," she cried happily.
  "It's been a long time, Ila," responded Andrea.
  "Last time we met was when you were promoted to Colonel to be a
commandant at The Academy. Come on in, Andrea."
  The two women went into the house, and Andrea followed Ila into the
study. Ila went to handle some electronic equipment, punching in a
sequence at the keyboard there.
  "Are you ready to join my crew?"
  "I'm all ready to go, except for one problem."
  "What?"
  "It seems that my husband has not been responding to my messages. I
have sent eight messages asking for Adama to respond."
  "Well, Ila, he hasn't responded to any of mine, either. And I have
tried everything. Also, keep in mind that the communication systems
aboard the Andromeda have a lot more capability than this one. I need
to tell him the good news about his little sister." She smiled,
successfully hiding the worry that she felt.
  "Oh, yes, congratulations on getting a real battlestar... Commander."
  The two women giggled.
  "Yeah, I cannot wait to tell him that his little sister has made
history, by becoming the first woman to command a battlestar, and, that
his wife has joined his little sister's crew to give those aboard the
Andromeda the best cooking that any battlestar crew can have."
  Ila pushed a button on the small console in front of the terminal.
"But I thought that you already did that, by commanding the Pegasus
yahrens ago."
  "It was only a temporary assignment. And women have taken temporary
command of ships before."
  Ila stared at the snow on the monitor in front of her.
  "Well, come on, Ila. We can't keep the crew of the Andromeda waiting.
We will head to Cimtar and we can both tell him, Apollo, Athena and Zac
in person."
  With that, Ila grabbed two large cases, and Andrea grabbed the other
two, left the home and headed to the shuttle.

Several shuttles approached the battlestar, followed by an entire horde
of vipers, more than the average human can count.
  Colonel Meine stood on the command deck, listening to the frackus
from the communications with the vipers. Andrea, followed by Ila,
walked onto the bridge, and up onto the command deck. Andrea handed Ila
a set of headphones, who placed it on her head adjusted the mouthpiece.
Andrea took another one, and put it on. Together, the three listened.
  *All right, Orange Squadron... You are next. As soon as you get
clearance to land, you know what to do. I remind you again... Just
remember that you are landing in a battlestar landing bay... Not a long
runway like that of the launch field of the academy or a military
ground post.*
  Ila and Andrea looked at each other.
  "Is that Zane I hear?" asked Ila.
  "Yes, it is, Ila. Yes it is. Now, let's go greet my son, your nephew,
in the landing bay."
  With that, Andrea, and Ila removed the communications gear from their
heads and walked down the stairs off the command center, and then off
the bridge.

In the landing bay, young men and women walked towards the lift, some,
still wearing their flight helmets, and others, with the helmets under
their arms and against their ribs, acknowledging their commander as
they walked past her.
  Both, Andrea and Ila nodded back to the pilots.
  Looking around, one viper still held its pilot, who was looking
around the inside of his cockpit.
  Andrea quickly climbed into the viper next to the one in question,
grabbed the headphones, and placed it on her head. She then said into
the mouthpiece, "The button's right in front of you, Zane," said
Andrea.
  *I know, Mother,* he said.
  "What's wrong?"
  *You're not going to like this, Mother.*
  "What?"
  *I'm a mess, and I need to get cleaned up. And the inside of this
cockpit is going to need a good cleaning.*
  "What happened?"
  *The cargo that I was carrying, well... it kind of floated and
bounced around.*
  The canopy of the cockpit opened finally, revealing the pilot with
white, powdery stuff and fluff all over himself.
  Andrea looked at him, and giggled.
  "You should have installed a G-device on whatever that was you were
carrying, Zane."
  "I know, Mother, but the launch of was rescheduled sooner than
originally planned. I did not have the time to get one in place."
  "Well, Captain, let's get you cleaned up."
  "Uh, right, Commander."
  "What happened Zane," asked Ila.
  "Uh, the gift that I brought for you and Mother, just sort of-"
  Ila doubled over laughing. "We got to get you cleaned up, young man,"
she said. "But thanks for the thought."
  Zane nodded to his aunt, and the two women followed Zane onto the
lift.

On the bridge, Andrea ordered, "Alert status."
  The lighting turned red, and alarms were echoing throughout.
  Captain Zane, finally cleaned up, ran onto the bridge. "What's going
on?"
  Meine said, "Activity at Cimtar... All communications to that area
have definitely been jammed." Meine turned to her, and said, "You were
right again, Commander."
  Battle stations," ordered Andrea. "Light speed."
  "Commander, I must point out that we have not gone to light speed in
this battlestar since the completion of its construction."
  "Well, either way, we're dead then, are we not? Trust me, Colonel. I
know the capabilities of this battlestar."
  On the command deck, the officer at the station, Herman, said, "Two
more massive explosions have been detected by our sensors."
  "Zane, round up all viper pilots," ordered Andrea. "And be prepared
to launch."
  "Yes, Mother." With that, he ran down the stairs of the command deck,
and off the bridge.

Ila got to the bridge. "What's going on here?"
  "It seems that the peace treaty did turn out to be a trap," responded
Andrea. "Two battlestars have already been destroyed. I just hope that
I get there in time to rescue my brother and Adar."
  "Can't this battlestar go any faster?" asked Ila. "That's my husband
and our good friend of the family we're talking about here."
  Meine said, "This is probably the fastest battlestar that has ever
been constructed. We ARE moving to get there as fast as we can, and all
our vipers are ready to launch upon arrival."
  The warbook showed the blueprints of two basestars, one after
another, and two battlestars. Another monitor showed a basestar pulling
away, as well as one of the battlestars in another direction on the
edge of the scanner. At the same time, the other battlestar blip turned
into a star, and then disappeared.

In space, the Andromeda slowed down.
  *Purple Squadron... Launch,* said Andrea's voice.
  There was still a basestar at Cimtar.

On the command deck of that basestar, a Cylon walked in, saying, "by
your command"
  The IL series Cylon sitting on the large chair on the pedestal
turned, andsaid, "Speak, Centurion."
  "Another battlestar has just arrived and is heading right for us"
  "Launch fighters," ordered the IL.
  "Our fighters are in the process of refueling"
  "Well, Centurion, make the process go faster."
  "By your command"

Back on the red-lit bridge of the Andromeda, Ila and Andrea hugged each
other tightly, with Ila crying, "We're... We're too late... My
husband... my two sons... My daughter... Adar... All dead..."
  Andrea reached up, saying, "Hades... It is time for revenge."
  She and Ila slowly walked off the command deck together, with Andrea
stuttering, "Cuh-Colonel Meine... Please, t-t-take command for a
centon."
  "All right, Commander." He wiped his cheek with the back of his hand.

*-yes, Colonel... Take out the landing bays first,* said Zane as if in
response.
  The five vipers, led by Captain Zane, were flying around the upper
hull the basestar. They fired their lasers at the basestar
simultaneously, causing an explosion on it.
  Lasers from the basestar were firing at them, but missing. Another
group of three vipers passed them, going in the other direction, firing
at various points at the basestar.
  Three raiders managed to launch from another landing bay.
  The three vipers turned around, and headed back behind the five
pursuing the Cylon raiders.
  On the targeting scanner in one of the vipers, a Cylon raider was
right in the center of the scanner and blinking.
  Back outside, the viper in the middle of the three fired two rounds
of lasers, destroying the Cylon fighter in the center.
  *That one is for Uncle Adama,* said Zane's voice.

Back on the bridge of the battlestar, everyone was busy at their
stations.
  "Status of the basestar, Son," said Andrea into the mouthpiece of her
communications apparatus on her head.
  *Severe damage to the basestar's launch bays, Mother.* was Zane's
response. *And most of its weaponry as well.*
  "All right, Captain, return to the Andromeda. Leave the rest to us."

The battlestar approached the basestar, firing lasers at it. From the
basestar, one laser fired back, but only one laser torpedo per several
microns.

Back on the bridge, Andrea ordered, "Negative shields."
  The window revealed space out there, and a basestar emitting tiny
flairs from various places.
  "Ready missiles, Herman," said Andrea.
  Herman switched some red switches, exposing the actual switches to
fire the missiles, and then reported, "Missiles ready to launch on your
order, Commander."
  "FIRE!" cried Andrea.
  A hand flipped the small red switch.

*The Andromeda launched missiles,* reported Zane to the other vipers.
*Let's get out of here.*
  The five vipers fired off their turbos, heading away from the dying
basestar.
  *Let's look for survivors,* said Zane.
  Several other groups of vipers joined the five. Then there was a
massive blast of blinding light from behind them. When that cleared,
the five vipers were still in formation, with other vipers around them.
Communications was a mess from viper pilots trying to figure out what
was what.
  *Can you see what's out there?*
  *Was that the basestar or the Andromeda?*
  *Or both?*
  *All I can see is spots.*
  *That was some flash.*
  The five were heading towards what looked like a piece of a
battlestar's landing bay.
  *ZANE! LOOK OUT!*
  Just then, Zane got his sight back. On the battlestar landing bay
fragment the letters, A, T, L, A, and a fragment of the letter N was on
it. his viper veered away from the fragment.
  *Thank you, Io,* said Zane. *That was a piece of the Atlantia, by the
way... President Adar's battlestar, commanded by Fleet Commander Mars.*
  *The Andromeda is still there, Captain,* someone pointed out.
  *Good,* said Zane.

On the bridge, the red lighting turned back to normal. "Remain on alert
status. We don't know what might still be out there."
  Out the window, they saw another battlestar landing bay fragment,
with the letters, U, M, B, I, and A.
  "The Columbia?" asked Ila, who was still on the command deck with
Andrea and Meine.
  "Yes," responded Meine. "The Columbia, commanded by Commander
Hercules."

There was another battlestar fragment that the five vipers passed, with
the name, ACROPOLIS.
  *The Acropolis,* noted Io into his helmetcom, *Commanded by Commander
Aries.*
  *I heard that he was one great warrior,* remarked Zane.
  *Nothing like Commanders Adama of the Galactica and Cain of the
Pegasus,* responded Io. *Captain, should we look for survivors like you
said?*
  *Unless the bridge has any objections, I agree,* responded Zane.
  *Permission granted to look for survivors, Captain,* said Andrea's
voice. *I will join you shortly.

*Andrea's viper flashed through the launch tube, and was out in space.
The area was full of debris, pieces of metal, Cylon fighter fragments,
and viper fragments. She did a 180 degree turn to join the rest of the
vipers, and then she noticed. Two intact Cylon tankers.
  *Purple Squadron... Orange Squadron...* she said into her helmetcom.
*I think that I struck something precious here...

*Zane said into his helmetcom, *Lee, take charge of Purple Squadron...
Io and I are going to see what the Commander found.*
  *Right-o,* said the female voice.

The three vipers landed in one of the tankers. The canopies opened up,
and the three pilots climbed out, drawing their laser pistols.
  "Be careful where you fire those things," said Andrea. "This is a
tanker, probably full of processed tylium. One shot in the wrong place
can blow us ALL."
  "Yes, Mother," replied Zane.
  "I'll be careful," said Io.

They made it to its small bridge.
  "This tanker is abandoned," said Io.
  "They must have launched all their fighters from the tankers as
well," speculated Zane.
  "Well, let's get this to the Andromeda, and see about the other one."
  With that, Zane sat in the pilot's seat on the left, and Io, on the
right. Andrea sat in the seat behind them.
  "Do you know how to fly this piece of Cylon felbacarb?" asked Io.
  "Well, we just have to improvise," remarked Andrea. "And act like we
know how to fly this 'piece of felgercarb.'"

Back on the bridge of the Andromeda, Ila more or less got herself back
together.
  "Engage light speed to Caprica," ordered Andrea.
  "Light speed engaged," said Herman.
  "Execute when ready."
  "Yes, Commander."
  The blinking light on the console went from blinking to steady.
  "Executing..." Herman placed his finger on a button. "Now," he said
as he pressed it.

Andrea's Journal.We arrived a tad too late to help the fleet at Cimtar.
All of the battlestars were verified destroyed, except the Galactica.
We managed to pick up three survivors, all three from the Galactica.
According to them, the Galactica ran away, and the way they see it,
they see my older brother as a coward.

In the bio-bed at the life station, the injured pilot cursed Adama.
  "That Adama... a coward, leaving us to... to... fend for ourselves
against all those Cylons. If it was not for Lieutenant Starbuck, I
would have been... blown to pieces, but he was a tad too late. He
probably left me out here... because he thought that I was dead..."

Andrea's Journal Continued.I doubt that my brother would have just
merely ran away. I know where he went. He took the Galactica to
Caprica. I am taking the Andromeda over there right now at maximum
speed to join with the Galactica, and to hopefully, help my brother
out. I just hope that I am not too late, for the sake of our chief
Officer's Club coordinator, Ila, and her family. From what I heard from
the three survivors, my youngest nephew, Zac, was already the first
casualty.

"I hope that my husband is still alive," said Ila to Andrea.
  "I hope that my brother and my older nephew and my niece are still
alive, too, Ila. In the meantime, you've got family here, on the
Andromeda."
  The two women hugged each other.
  "There is a chance that the Galactica was captured," pointed out
Zane.
  "A battlestar, the Cylons would destroy, Zane," pointed out Andrea.
"Not merely capture it."

Meine was explaining to Andrea.
  "Long range sensors picked up three Cylon basestars-" He paused to
point out the three places on the star map. "... Here, here and here.
But they have gone to light speed."
  "Any sign of the Galactica?" asked Andrea. "After all, we haven't
found any debris from Adama's battlestar."
  "No, but if Adama brought it up to light speed, we cannot pick it up
on our sensors."

Andrea's Journal ContinuedAll I can do is hope for the best. But I hope
that I am not too late. We may be lucky since the Andromeda is
supposedly the fastest battlestar ever constructed. But- that is also
assuming that the Galactica did not get a refit recently.

The Andromeda approached the planet Caprica.
  On the bridge, the communications officer, Romulus, reported, "We
tried every known colonial code that has been registered... Still no
response. Also, scanners have not picked up any ships of any kind at
all in the vicinity... And neither has our patrol. But then, it could
be from all the interference from all the destruction."
  Andrea ordered, "Keep trying, Romulus."
  "Yes, Commander."
  "By the way, who is on patrol?" asked Meine.
  "Zane and Io," replied James.

The Andromeda was in orbit around the planet Caprica.
  Several vipers and shuttles were heading there. Two vipers and a
shuttle were heading there also, but in a different direction.

The surface of Caprica was misty. The slight fog that loomed was not
from the weather, but from the burning destruction inflicted by the
Cylon forces. Most of the fires that the laser fodder created were out
on the planet. What was once trees and shrubbery was turned to charred
sticks sticking up out of the ground, and soot covered the ground
itself around them.
  Finally, they got to where they were headed, and landed near what was
left of the home that Ila raised her family in. The three vessels came
to a full stop on the ground, and the vipers' canopies opened up. At
the same time, so did the door to the shuttle. From the shuttle, Ila,
followed by Andrea, climbed out, and Io and Zane, from the vipers. Once
Zane and Io had their feet on the ground, they removed their helmets
tossed them into the cockpits.

Andrea found some kind of device on the ground, and two tape-like
thingies right next to them. She picked them all up, blowing the dirt
off them. She placed the dusted tape into the device, as Ila, Zane and
Io looked on.
  *Most of us are dead,* said a man's voice. *The fleet is all but
destroyed.*
  Andrea pressed a button on the device, looking at Ila and Zane.
  Zane said with a surprised look on his face, "That sounded like
'Pollo."
  "You mean Apollo? Your cousin?" asked Io.
  "It IS Apollo," said Ila. Her face was lit up. "He's alive!"
  Andrea pressed the button again, resuming playback.
  A female voice asked, *But you're here.*
  *From the battlestar Galactica,* said that same male voice.
  *It survived?*
  *Yes.* answered the male voice.
  *What of the President, and the Council of Twelve? And- and all of
the other colonies?* asked the female voice.
  *All destroyed,* responded a deeper man's voice.
  Zane reached over to the device and pressed the button again to halt
the recording.
  "I know that voice," said Zane.
  Both, Ila and Andrea looked at each other. "Adama," said both of them
in perfect harmony.
  Io stared at the two women and Zane as if each of them had two heads.
  "I know my husband's voice," said Ila, staring straight at Io.
"That... is no doubt, Adama's voice."
  *Commander Adama...* said the woman's voice on the tape. That
verified it.
  *Yes, Serina.*
  Io then asked, "Isn't Serina that Caprican news person from I-F-B?"
  Andrea quickly stopped the recording again, and then pressed another
button for a split-micron. A high-pitched cacophony sounded from it
during that split-micron.
  "Yes, she is," said Ila. "And Apollo had a crush on her." She
giggled. "From the first time he saw her on I-F-B."
  Andrea said, "I would too if I was a young man like Apollo."
  She then pressed the button, and the playback resumed.
  *-Ander Adama...* said the woman's voice on the tape.
  *Yes, Serina.*
  *It's true then. We're defeated, doomed.* remarked the female voice.
  A few microns of static came from the device.
  *... survive.* the female apparently finished a sentence. Then her
voice bellowed from the device, *We must fight back.*
  After a few microns of silence, the deep voice of Adama said, *Yes,
we are going to fight back, but not here not now, not in the colonies,
not even in this star system. Let the word go forth to every man, woman
and child that survived this holocaust. Tell them to set sail in at
once in every assorted vehicle that will carry them.*
  The recording stopped playing. Andrea removed the first cassette-like
thingie from the device, and placed the second one in, and the same
audio repeated.
  They continued to move on to what was left of the home that Ila had
residedin most of her life.
  Inside of what was left of the home, Andrea, Ila, Zane, and Io looked
around. There was an small, open trunk on the floor, with the small
folded plaque with the picture of Adama, Ila, Apollo, Athena, and Zac.
There was a slight smear on the picture of Ila.
  "Someone has been here," said Andrea.
  Ila inspected the box, and said, "It must have been Adama and
Apollo." She picked up the small lock from the floor, inspecting it.
"It WAS either Adama, Apollo, Athena, or Zac. This lock was opened with
a key... Only Adama, my children, and I have a key to open this lock."
  Andrea found another box hiding near the same area. "Adama wanted us
to open this one in the event that he died."
  "I am surprised he did not take it," said Ila.
  "He probably assumed that we were both dead, Ila, and probably had no
need for it. Now it is up to us to find out what direction they went
and go that way. Assuming that there may be some ships that are not
capable of going light speed, we can catch up to Adama, and have two
battlestars to protect the fleet."
  "Yes..." responded Ila in thought.
  "We better get back, Ila..." said Andrea, placing a gentle hand on
her shoulder. "The sooner we get moving, the easier it will be to find
the Galactica and whatever fleet has formed, and catch up to them."
  "Andrea, there is plenty of food stock underneath this house... Adama
had it built there, just for in case. And from the looks of it, no one
has been in there. And I'm sure that we will need it."
  "We have loads aboard the Andromeda."
  Zane looked at his mother, and said, "I agree with Ila, Mother..."
  Andrea stood there for a micron and said, "Well, let's get to it."

In another area of the planet was what was left of the Academy of
Caprica, which was only a few charred poles that provided part of its
foundation, and piles of burnt and charred rubble. Lee and other
Colonial warriors went under ground. This was the place that everyone
slept, and actually lived when they were not above on the ground
performing training exercises. It was also where some of the smaller
military vessels were repaired. It the ship was small enough to land on
the planet surface, then it was small enough to be brought under ground
for refueling, reloading and repairs.
  It was noticed by Sergeant Burger. It was a vessel of some sort, with
one of its laser turrets pointed directly at them.
  "JUMP FOR COVER!" yelled Lee. Apparently, she noticed the laser
turret, too.
  Everyone jumped, but nothing happened.
  "Maybe there is no one in there," suggested someone.
  Burger said, "We should take a look. If it is space worthy, then we
should try to take it with us."
  "All right. I agree with that, Sergeant, but proceed with caution,"
instructed Lee.

In another part of the academy grounds, was the dining area. Captain
Paddon of Orange Squadron looked around there with his team. There was
food around, but not much.
  "This place looks so different without the all of that food and
cadets and Colonial warriors we used to see around here," someone
pointed out.
  "Yes," agreed Paddon. "Where did it all go?" he muttered to himself.
  "With Commander Adama." It was Andrea's voice that startled everyone.
Behind her was Ila.
  "Impossible," said Paddon. "The Galactica was destroyed."
  "Think, Captain," ordered Andrea. "We saw traces of the Columbia,
Atlantia, Solaria, Acropolis, but no Galactica. Oh, yeah, you were not
there when we spoke with the three survivors. All three of them claim
that the Galactica ran away, leaving their viper pilots to fend for
themselves."
  She held out the recording device to Paddon.
  "And here... Listen to this."
  Andrea pressed a button, and a high-pitched cacophony came from the
device. She then pressed another button on it, and then another. A few
microns of static came from the device.
  *... survive.* the female apparently finished a sentence. Then the
female voice bellowed from the device, *We must fight back.*
  The deep male voice said, *Yes, we are going to fight back, but not
here not now, not in the colonies, not even in this star system, let
the word go forth to every man, woman and child that survived this
holocaust. Tell them to set sail in at once in every assorted vehicle
that will carry them.*
  "Well, Commander," responded Paddon. "I think that Colonel Meine and
the rest of the crew will be glad to hear this." He paused. "That some
have survived this, uh, what did that man call it?"
  "Holocaust," responded Andrea. "And that man's voice is Commander
Adama's."
  "Yes, Commander. Assuming that it is really Adama's voice."
  "Ila knows her husband's voice, and I know my brother. This IS really
him, but again, we were a tad too late."
  "Captain!" yelled someone. "I found survivors."
  He was someone from Purple Squadron. He looked at Andrea, and nodded
to her. "Commander, Lieutenant Lee also found a small warship that was
undergoing repairs. It is the warship Triton Six. She and the rest of
Purple Squadron are trying to complete it."
  "Any signs of food or fuel?" asked Captain Paddon.
  "Not yet, but I DID find a compartment that will only open with
authorization from a colonel or commander. Perhaps we will find
something there."
  "Who WERE the survivors?" asked Andrea. "And where are they?"
  "A cadet, two women, and several children. They are with Lieutenant
Lee right now, helping her with the ship."
  "Paddon, come with me. Lead the way, Ensign."
  The trio walked away.

Zane was in the ship, helping Lee out.
  "Where's Io?" asked Lee as she was covering a section of the ship
with the paneling.
  "He went to bring Ila back to the Andromeda. Ila had a few things
that managed to survive the Cylon assault at her house, including food
stocked up in an underground alcove."
  Lee and Zane faced each other, and Zane continued on. "You know, Lee,
I am surprised that Adama did not take that food with him."
  "What?"
  "Oh, yes, you don't know what else we found."
  "What?" Lee stopped working to listen.
  "We found a message from Adama that was evidently broadcasted
throughout the Twelve Colonies to get into any kind of ship and join
the Galactica. My uncle's alive, and so is Apollo, my cousin. I heard
them both on the tape."
  "I still don't believe it," said Lee. "I mean. we found a survivor
here who said that they could not fit any more people onto those
ships."
  A young man in a uniform came up saying, "Engines are fully
functional, Lieutenant..."
  He saw Zane, seeing his pins, and addressed him, "Captain?"
  "Captain Zane of the Andromeda..." He stopped what he was doing and
held a hand out to him. "And you are?"
  "Cadet Alexander," answered the young man as he accepted his hand.
  "What are YOU doing here?"
  "There was no more room on any of the ships that left with the fleet
that joined the Galactica, Sir. So I stayed behind, hoping to kill as
many of those Cylons as I can when they decided to come in here."
  Zane stood there in thought. "So I wonder how many more survivors
there are? Throughout the colonies?"
  "I cannot say, but I am sure that we are not the only survivors."
  "Well, this ship seems space worthy now, let's see if there is fuel."
  Lee said, "Cadet Alexander pointed out a tylium tank right outside
before, Captain, but we're not sure if it is full or not. But this ship
is carrying half of its maximum fuel capacity."
  "But- can it launch through all that rubble above us?" asked
Alexander.
  "Well, it was lowered here under the ground, if the equipment still
works, we can probably try to get it above ground through that rubble,
and then try launching. Other than that... we will have to crash
through solid rock. However, by design, an entire battlestar or a Cylon
basestar crashing here would not break through it. It was to protect
this area."
  "Cylons. What I would do for a chance to destroy every one of them,"
murmured Alexander.
  "We all would, Cadet. They killed my father and my sister at Molecai
two yahrens ago, and in that attack at Cimtar, my youngest cousin,
Zac."
  "You know Zac? Commander Adama's son?" Alexander's eyes lit up.
  "Yes, Alexander, My mother is Adama's- err... Commander Adama's,
younger sister."
  "He graduated from here a few yahrens ago, and worked here. He was
called to active duty by his father aboard the- the-"
  "-Galactica," finished Zane.
  "Did you say that Zac is dead?" Alexander's tone of voice changed.
"And how would you know that?!"
  Zane turned around, turning away from Alexander.
  "We picked up survivors at Cimtar," answered Lee. "they said that he
was the first casualty."
  "No..." whispered Alexander. "Zac was a great guy," he muttered. "He
has helped many of us get through our courses here at the Academy."
  Zane turned around, saying, "But his brother, father, and mother are
still alive." He was trying to see the good side of all this.
  "I know, but they had to leave those two women and seven children
behind."
  One of the women entered. "No one knew about us, and we did know
about Commander Adama's message. We just ran in here as soon as the
Cylons attacked, and have hidden here ever since, until we were found
by Alexander, and then we were discovered by someone from your
squadron."
  Alexander spoke. "We did find a compartment that can only be opened
by the authorization of a colonel or commander though. It was found by
Sarah here."

Andrea, Paddon, and the Purple Squadron Ensign were inside. They did
not find anything in there, except a disabled control station.
  "So this is how the Cylons were able to get through the anti-fighter
defenses," said Andrea out loud. "Someone deactivated the defense
systems from in here."
  "COMMANDER!" yelled Paddon.
  She ran over. There was a man's body on the floor, with a large burn
mark on his chest. The pins on his collar clearly labeled him as a
commander.
  "Commandant Luke," murmured Andrea. "He had replaced me as the
administrator when I was transferred to Deep Space Station Nineteen."
  "He must have come in here for something, and gotten himself shot by
the saboteur," said Paddon.
  "Well, let's join the rest of Purple Squadron, and see how things are
coming along with that ship they found."

Andrea, Paddon, and the ensign made it to the where Triton VI was
sitting to find that she got there in time to see it space worthy...
but there was still a problem. There was the large hatch above, made of
solid rock, that when it opened, the rubble from the ground above it
would cave in, and probably bury the ship.
  They went inside the ship to find that many of its systems were
activated.
  Zane saw his mother and the other two enter.
  "How do you expect to launch this thing?" asked Andrea. "Crash
through these solid walls?"
  "Well, we launch as the hatch opens up, and use the laser turrets to
clear the falling rubble that comes falling from above."
  "Well, what if these is too much? And what if the turrets miss?"
  "Mom, if these turrets can get Cylon fighters attacking at just
sub-light speed, surely-"
  Paddon asked, "Does Alpha Comline One work?"
  Zane said, "If it does, perhaps a well-placed missile from the
Andromeda is just what we need to clear some of the rubble from above."
  "But it may bring the hatch down onto us as well," said Andrea. "We
don't know how much the Cylon bombardment may have weakened the hatch
above us. And you know that the laser turrets would not do a very good
job at preventing that from hurting the hull of the Triton Six."
  "Well," said Zane. "Purple and Orange Squadrons await the launch
order. Perhaps we can let them clear away some of the rubble from
above. All of the vipers and shuttles have been refueled from outside
pumps until we emptied that tylium tank we found. And this ship is
carrying almost maximum fuel capacity."
  "Good thinking, Zane," said Andrea.
  "It was Lee's idea."
  "It was Cadet Alexander who told us about that fuel tank," added Lee.
  Alexander looked at Andrea with a shy look.

*Launch.* It was Andrea's voice that gave the order to the vipers above
on the ground. Vipers moved forwards on the ground, gradually picking
up speed, and then lifting off the ground.
  Once up in the air, some of the vipers flew very close to the ground
towards what was left of the Academy building, laying down a blanket of
laser fire that cleared away some of the debris. More vipers followed
doing the same thing.

*All clear, Commander,* said Captain Paddon's voice.
  Under the ground, the hatch above started to open as Andrea ran into
the Triton VI. The platform that the small war ship sat on rose as the
door into the vessel closed.
  By the time the hatch was opened, the platform held the ship above
the ground.
  Inside the ship was Zane, Lee, Alexander, and Andrea, two women and
seven children.
  "Your call, Mother," said Zane.
  "Ready launch sequence."
  "Already done," responded Lee.
  "Launch."
  "Executing," responded Zane.

The Battlestar Andromeda orbited Caprica, with other assorted ships
alongside, behind, and in front of it.
  On the Andromeda, the vipers and shuttles from the surface of Caprica
were seen returning. Meine was standing on the command deck with Herman
sitting at the station there. Then they saw the small war ship, that
brought Ooh's and Aahh's from many of the bridge personnel. Meine
looked happily surprised.
  "Signal coming over Alpha Comline One," said the young woman. Then
she asked, "Colonel, I thought that the Andromeda was the only war ship
around. Am I doing something wrong?"
  Meine looked at the small monitor, seeing Andrea's face on it. He
turned to her, saying, "No, you're doing all right."
  *Greetings, Meine. You have always wanted to be commanding officer of
your own ship. Would you like the Andromeda? Or the Triton Six?*
  "I think I'll take the Triton Six, Commander. The Andromeda is YOUR
battlestar." Despite all he had heard about Andrea's sixth sense, he
was still surprised that she knew. However, it could be just that it is
the ambition of nearly every Colonial Warrior: to command one's own war
ship.
  *All right, Colonel. Assemble your crew, and transport here in
shuttles. I'll have Ila cook something up and have it sent over to you.
And just don't take the entire crew with you.* Andrea smiled.
  Meine smiled back. "Sounds good, Commander. Oh, if you notice,
Commander, several ships have joined us. Some fifty vessels that were
since repaired. Herman has taken a team, and they are right now
inspecting the ships."
  *And I have news, Colonel; Adama is still alive!*
  "So I heard from the other people on the ships... They said that
Commander Adama sent a message to all of the survivors in all the
colonies to get into any ship that would carry them. However, there
were ships that had to be repaired and refueled first. They were
repaired and loaded with fuel, and by the time they got here, they
found that the Galactica and the fleet had already left."
  *Looks like that they got here to find US!* cut in Andrea with a
smile.
  Meine smiled back. "We also have four agroships, but nothing on
them," Meine continued. "Ila had brought back seeds, and she had them
sent to the agroships. We also have two livestock ships. I just hope
that the food that we have right now will not run out before the seeds
mature to the vegetation that we need."
  *That's good news... Any BAD news?*
  "Yes. Although all of the ships do have light speed capability, some
of them cannot go light speed because light speed capability was not
repaired."
  *Well, we can see what we can do about that when we are under way...
In the meantime...

*Herman and Meine stood on the bridge of the Triton VI, tall and proud.
  "This ship may not be a battlestar, but you've got your own war
vessel to command," said Herman.
  "Yes I do, Herman... And Commander Andrea has her own fleet. May not
be a fleet of warships on a campaign, but it is a fleet."

Andrea, Zane, Io, Sarah, and four of the children sat at a table
together in the officers' club. Ila pushed a cart with plates of food.
  "Won't you join us Ila?"
  "I've got to clean up first."
  "Eat with us, Ila... You are part of this crew you know."
  "I guess I am." With that, she took the last plate off the cart, and
sat down with them.
  Zane said, "We will catch up with Uncle Adama... I know it."
  "Yes we will," said Andrea. "Yes we will... And hopefully, not a tad
too late like these other times."

The Andromeda, followed by the Triton VI, and the rest of the fleet moved forwards.

Fleeing from Cylon tyranny, the Battlestar, Andromeda, leads a ragtag, fugitive fleet, on a lonely quest with one goal: Survival.
