Dates: 0420, 0427

"Keep that damn line straight!" The sergeant's voice was loud yet calm on my comm system.

The 19 other members of my platoon got the message and the line stabilizied right as we hit the town. As much noise as we made it was hard for me to believe that there we achieved any kind of tactical surprise.

21 augmented soldiers assaulting a town where hostages were taken was almost not fair. But, as we've been told over and over, fair is when we complete the mission and return to base without cassualtiies.

The teams spread out as planned and broke into the buildings and began the systematic destruction of the village. We were told to cause as much material damage as possible but to refrain, if at all possible, to huurt people.

It wasn't long before the sergeant called the retreat. We pulled back in good order and we set up the perimeter as the transports landed. We fell back in good order and we were on our way home.

Wherever or whatever that home happened to be.

"Not bad, not bad. I'm only mildly displeased." Sergeant Jenkins voice came on the internal platoon comms. He then began to ciriticize the mission as we flew back to our base of operations in Orbital Base Alpha.

Most of us were single... some by choice, others because they didn't see the benefits of being attached to a civilian, and others because we were partnered with other soldiers and we didn't care much for the higher ups to know there was fraternzation in the ranks.

My fireteam leader and I didn't want to get caught but, at the same time, didn't think we should keep ourselves from fun and enjoyment.


